Rewrite Log and Observability (#1830)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/observability/metrics-and-stats.md

# Statistics and Metrics

EMQX provides metrics monitoring functions, based on which the operation and maintenance personnel can monitor the current service status and troubleshoot possible system malfunctions. 

EMQX divides monitoring status into Statistics and Metrics. 

- Statistics are integer-type gauges used to return a single value at the point of time the metric was requested. 

> - Metrics are integer-type counters used to measure simple incrementing and decrementing numbers, such as the number of sent bytes and messages.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Metrics are integer-type counters used to measure simple incrementing and decrementing numbers, such as the number of bytes and messages sent or received.  
```

EMQX provides users with multiple ways to view statistics and metrics. Most directly, you can view these data on the EMQX Dashboard. When it is not convenient to access the Dashboard, you can also get the data through [REST API](#request-metrics-and-statitics-via-rest-api) and [system topic](#obtain-metrics-and-statistics-via-system-topics) messages. Additionally, you can easily integrate the monitoring functions with your own monitoring system, see [Integrate with Prometheus](./prometheus.md). 

## View Statistics on Dashboard

> On EMQX Dashboard, click **Monitoring** -> **Cluster Overview** from the left navigation menu. On the **Cluster Overview** page, click the **Nodes** tab. Click the name of the node to see the details about the node statistics of the specific node on the right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On EMQX Dashboard, click **Monitoring** -> **Cluster Overview** from the left navigation menu. On the **Cluster Overview** page, click the **Nodes** tab. Click the name of the node to see the statistics details on the right.
```

| retained.count             | The number of currently retained messages                    |
| retained.max               | The historical maximum number of retained messages           |
| delayed.count              | The number of currently delayed messages                     |
| delayed.max                | The historical maximum number of delayed  messages           |

## View Metrics on Dashboard

On EMQX Dashboard, click **Monitoring** -> **Cluster Overview** from the left navigation menu. On the **Cluster Overview** page, you can see metrics by clicking the **Metrics** tab. EMQX Metrics currently covers four dimensions: bytes, packets, messages, and events.

### Connection and Session Metrics

You can see the event-related metrics for the cluster or node, such as client connection, connection sessions, and client access.

<img src="./assets/dashboard-event-metrics-ee.png" alt="dashboard-event-metrics-ee" style="zoom:50%;" />

#### Connections

| Metrics             | Description                                                  |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | client.connack      | The number of connection acknowledgment (CONNACK) messages received by clients |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| client.connack      | The number of connection acknowledgment (`CONNACK`) messages received by clients |
```

| client.connect      | The number of connection requests from the client, including both successful and failed connection requests |
| client.connected    | The number of client connections that have succeeded         |

> | client.disconnected | The number of client disconnections, including active and abrupt disconnection |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| client.disconnected | The number of client disconnections, including active and abnormal disconnections |
```

| client.subscribe    | The number of successful subscriptions                       |
| client.unsubscribe  | The number of successful unsubscriptions                     |

#### Sessions

| Metrics            | Description                                      |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------ |
| session.created    | The number of sessions that have been created    |
| session.discarded  | The number of sessions that have been discarded  |
| session.resumed    | The number of sessions that have been resumed    |
| session.takenover  | The number of sessions that have been taken over |
| session.terminated | The number of sessions that have been terminated |

#### Access

| Metrics                     | Description                                                  |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | authorization.allow         | The total number of client authorization passes, including getting authorization results by cache and authorization requests not matched by any rules |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| authorization.allow         | Total number of client authorization passes, that is, the sum of cache hits (retrieved authorization results) and matched authorization requests (those corresponding to the policy rules). |
```

> | authorization.deny          | The total number of client authorization fails, including getting authorization results by cache and authorization requests not matched by any rules |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| authorization.deny          | Total number of client authorization fails, that is, the sum of cache hits (retrieved authorization results) and unmatched authorization requests (those not corresponding to any policy rules).  |
```

> | authorization.matched.allow | The number of client authorization passes due to authorized by some rules |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| authorization.matched.allow | Number of client authorization passes as per the rules |
```

> | authorization.matched.deny  | The number of client authorization fails due to being rejected by some rules |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| authorization.matched.deny  | The number of client authorization fails as rejected by the rules |
```

> | authorization.nomatch       | The number of client authorization requests not matched by any rules |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| authorization.nomatch       | The number of client authorization requests not matching any rules |
```

| authorization.cache_hit     | The number of clients getting authorization results (allow or deny) by cache |
| authorization.superuser     | The number of clients being authorized as superuser          |

> | client.auth.anonymous       | The number of clients who log in anonymously                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| client.auth.anonymous       | The number of clients that log in anonymously                 |
```

| client.authenticate         | The number of triggered authentication                       |
| client.authorize            | The number of triggered authorization                        |

### Messaging

Scroll down the **Metrics** page, and you can see message-related metrics, including bytes, packets, messages, and delivery. 

<img src="./assets/dashboard-messaging-metrics-ee.png" alt="dashboard-messaging-metrics-ee" style="zoom:50%;" />

#### Bytes

| Metrics    | Description              |
| -------------- | ------------------------ |

> | bytes.received | The number of received bytes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| bytes.received | Number of bytes received |
```

> | bytes.sent     | The umber of sent bytes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| bytes.sent     | The number of bytes sent |
```

| messages.delivered              | The number of messages forwarded to the subscription process internally by EMQX |
| messages.dropped                | The total number of messages dropped by EMQX before forwarding to the subscription process |
| messages.dropped.no_subscribers | The number of messages dropped due to no subscribers  |
| messages.dropped.await_pubrel_timeout | The number of messages dropped due to await PUBREL timeout |
| messages.forward                | The number of messages forwarded to other nodes       |
| messages.publish                | The number of messages published in addition to system messages |
| messages.qos0.received          | The number of QoS 0 messages received from clients    |
| messages.qos1.received          | The number of QoS 2 messages received from clients    |
| messages.qos2.received          | The number of QoS 1 messages received from clients    |
| messages.qos0.sent              | The number of QoS 0 messages sent to clients          |
| messages.qos1.sent              | The number of QoS 1 messages sent to clients          |
| messages.qos2.sent              | The number of QoS 2 messages sent to clients          |

> | messages.received               | The number of messages received from the client, which is equal to the sum of `messages.qos0.received`,` messages.qos1.received`, and `messages.qos2.received` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| messages.received               | The number of messages received from the client, which is equal to the sum of `messages.qos0.received`, ` messages.qos1.received`, and `messages.qos2.received` |
```

> | messages.sent                   | The number of messages sent to the client, which is equal to the sum of `messages.qos0.sent`,` messages.qos1.sent`, and `messages.qos2.sent` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| messages.sent                   | The number of messages sent to the client, which is equal to the sum of `messages.qos0.sent`, ` messages.qos1.sent`, and `messages.qos2.sent` |
```

#### Delivery

| Metrics                     | Description                                                  |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| delivery.dropped            | The total number of messages that have been dropped when being sent |
| delivery.dropped.expired    | The number of messages that have been dropped because the message expired when being sent |

> | delivery.dropped.no_local   | The number of messages that have been dropped due to the `No Local` subscription option when being sent |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| delivery.dropped.no_local   | The number of messages that have been dropped due to `No Local` when being sent |
```

> | delivery.dropped.qos0_msg   | The number of messages with QoS of 0 that have been dropped because the message queue was full when being sent |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| delivery.dropped.qos0_msg   | Number of dropped QoS 0 messages due to a full message queue during transmission. |
```

> | delivery.dropped.queue_full | The number of messages with a non-zero level of QoS that have been dropped because the message queue was full when being sent |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| delivery.dropped.queue_full | The number of dropped non-zero QoS level messages due to a full message queue during transmission. |
```

> | delivery.dropped.too_large  | The number of messages that have been dropped because the length exceeded the limit when being sent |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| delivery.dropped.too_large  | The number of dropped messages due to exceeding length limits during transmission. |
```

## Request Monitoring Status via REST API

> You can also get the metrics and statistics through the [API Docs](https://docs.emqx.com/en/enterprise/v5.0/admin/api-docs.html). Click **Metrics** on the left navigation menu on the UI to execute this API request. For how to work with EMQX API, see [REST API](../admin/api.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also get the metrics and statistics through the API. On how to work with EMQX API, see  [API Docs](../admin/api.md). 
```

> #### Connections

Reviewer 2: - client.connack：客户端收到连接确认（CONNACK）消息的次数，包括成功和失败的连接请求。
- client.connect：客户端发起连接请求的次数，包括成功和失败的连接请求。
- client.connected：客户端已成功连接的次数。
- client.disconnected：客户端断开连接的次数，包括主动断开和非正常断开。
- client.subscribe：客户端成功订阅主题的次数。
- client.unsubscribe：客户端成功取消订阅主题的次数。

Reviewer 3: 包括成功和失败的连接请求，这个具体是什么意思，感觉有点无法理解，什么叫失败的连接请求？
直接说收到CONNACK指令的次数应该就明确了吧。@wivwiv

Reviewer 2: > 

同意，CONNACK 就要不要后半句了
